# Silico - A Perl Molecular Modelling Toolkit 


Written by David Chalmers and Ben Roberts 


Silico is a set of Perl libraries and scripts to assist with molecular 
modelling tasks. Capablilities include molecule and model system construction, 
format interconversion, molecular rotations and translations, atom and 
substructure naming, functional group identification or acting as a wrapper 
script for other software. 


## Installation 


Download Silico from Github: git clone git@github.com:dkchalmers/Silico.git 


Silico is organised as a single directory tree: 


bin&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Containing the executable scripts <br>
data&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Atom types, boilerplate text describing silico flags, etc. <br>
doc&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Documentation <br>
lib&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Library files containing silico subroutines <br>
test&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Directory with test files  <br>

Silico needs the environment variable $SILICO_HOME to point to the top level 
Silico directory. Add the $SILICO_HOME/bin directory to your path. 


csh 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;setenv SILICO_HOME /path/to/Silico  <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;setenv PATH $PATH\:$SILICO_HOME/bin   <br>

bash 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;export SILICO_HOME=/path/to/Silico  <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;export PATH="$PATH:$SILICO_HOME/bin"   <br>

## Using Silico scripts 


Silico scripts use the general form: 


scriptname <flags> filename1 filename2 .... 


Flags start with a the character '-'. There should be no space between the 
flag and any value associated with that flag. For example, the command 


write_mol -omol2 -cb test.pdb 


will read the file 'test.mol2', set the -o flag (output format) to pdb and set 
the -cb flag (recaculate bond orders). The result will be a new output file 
'test_new.mol2' with correct bond orders. 


### Universal Silico flags 


While most flags are specific to a script several flags are handled in the 
silico_io module and operate in all Silico scripts. These are: 


-help&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Print out the documenation present in the script file <br>
-m&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Prompt for all flags  <br>

### Common Silico flags 


These flags are available in many Silico scripts: 


-debug&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Print out debugging information <br>
-nosort&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Do not change atom order <br>
-notype&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Do not generate atom types <br>
-noconnect Do not generate atom connectivites <br>
-o&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Output file format. For most formats this is the file extension. Eg pdb, mol2, sdf. In some cases the format does not correspond to the extension. These are; Tinker cartesian - 'tinker', mopac cartesian - 'mopac', macromodel - 'mmod', Gaussian cartesian - 'gauss'. <br>
-O&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Output filename  <br>

### Support for large argument lists 


Older Unix shells are limited by the number of arguments (files) that can be 
included on the command line. Silico supports very large lists of input files 
by using Perl regular expressions to carry out its own wildcard matching. To 
use this feature it is necessary to enclose the file argument in quotes (to 
escape shell expansion). 


Example: write_mol2 '*.pdb' 


This command enables conversion of a very long list of pdb files to mol2 
format. 


### Documentation 


Silico scripts and libraries are documented within the source code. The 
documentation is marked up using a simple markup scheme (see silico_doc.pm) 
which can be easiyl converted to formatted ASCII text and/or HTML. Conversion 
routines are found in silico_doc.pm. The formatdoc script will perform the 
conversion for Silico files. A complete set of documentation is generated by 
running the script 'doc/makedoc'. 


### Internal data structures 


Internally molecular structures are stored in ensembles, molecules and atoms: 


#### Atoms 


Each atom is a Perl hash which can contain any desired fields. The most 
important are: 


$atom-&gt;{NUM} Atom number <br>
$atom-&gt;{NAME} Atom name <br>
$atom-&gt;{SUBNAME} Residue name <br>
$atom-&gt;{SUBID} Residue number <br>
$atom-&gt;{X} X coordinate <br>
$atom-&gt;{Y} Y coordinate <br>
$atom-&gt;{Z} Z coordinate <br>
$atom-&gt;{ELEMENT} Atom element <br>
$atom-&gt;{ELEMENT NUM} Atom element number <br>
$atom-&gt;{CONNECT} Pointer to array containing atom numbers of connected atoms <br>
$atom-&gt;{BORDERS} Pointer to array containing orders of bonds to connected atoms  <br>

#### Molecules 


Molecules are Perl hashes which contain attributes such as Name, Number of 
atoms and the collection of atom records in a hash. Any desired field can be 
put into the hash but the most important are: 


$mol-&gt;{ATOMS} Pointer to an array of atoms <br>
$mol-&gt;{NAME} Molecule name <br>
$mol-&gt;{NUMATOMS} Number of atoms. Note: indexed from 1 rather than 0. <br>
$mol-&gt;{NUMBONDS} Number of bonds. Note: indexed from 1 rather than 0.   <br>

#### Ensembles 


Ensembles are collections of molecules. They are stored simply as Perl arrays 
of molecules and unlike molecules or atoms can contain no additional 
attributes 


Ensembles are read from or written to output files as multiple molecule files 
(mol2, sdf, mmod) or as separate MODELS in a pdb file. 


### Scripts 


The bin directory contains variety of scripts that have been written in the 
course of various projects. 


#### File format conversion scripts 


A useful features of Silico is that it can read and write files in many 
different molecular modelling formats. Silico (mostly) recognises the input 
file types by filename extension. write_g03zmat write_gro write_itp 
write_merck write_mmod write_mol write_mol2 write_mopac write_pdb write_sdf 
write_seq write_tab write_tinker 


#### Wrapper sripts for running other programs 


Silico can be used to make wrappers to run other programs from the command 
line, particularly when running series of programs. An example is the script 
mmod_min 


#### Solvation scripts 


Basic solvation scripts include mol_solvate (to embed a molecule in a solvent 
box), mol_solvate_bilayer_plane (to place a molecule in a periodic bilayer 
plane) and mol_solvate_bilayer_rod (to place a periodic bilayer rod). 


### Caveats and notes 


Silico certainly contains bugs, definitions of things that may not be the best 
way to define things, inefficient algorithms, poor memory useage, and other 
things that can easily be fixed with the application of a lot of time and 
effort. 


Older iterations of silico were published on Sourceforge: 
sourceforge.net/projects/silico/ 


### Citition and citing papers 


Please cite as: Silico: A Perl Molecular Toolkit. DK Chalmers and BP Roberts. 
2010 


You can find papers that have used the Silico molecular toolkit here: 
https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=10206653385737204589 

